# Variation in acoustic community structure between avian guilds of core and edge areas of urban remnant forest patches: A pilot study in the Jalukbari Hill landscape of Guwahati city

Previous studies have highlighted the effects of urbanization on the forest cover in many cities around the world. In this regard, remnant forest patches in urban and suburban environments have been found harboring high floral diversity as compared to relatively large patches of similar forests (Abuhay et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2021, 2022). However, studies have shown that urbanization strengthens edge effect on remnant forests, giving rise to markedly different floral diversity in these edge habitats (Wang & Yang, 2022). The shift in floral species diversity from the interior of these remnant forests, to the periphery with higher perturbation and urbanization may affect faunal diversity as well. 

However, in the context of avian populations in remnant forests comprising of both habitat generalists and specialists, the effect of urbanization and edge effect on species diversity, richness etc. is poorly understood. Additionally, suburban patches have also been shown to have high functional richness in bird species, and these patches share taxonomic and phylogenetic compositions that are present uniquely either in urban, or primary forests- but not in both (Dri et al., 2024). In this regard, acoustic monitoring can be used as a reliable method in remnant forests to understand avian assemblage dynamics, with spatial, or temporal niche partitioning, or spatial turnover in different habitats (Doohan et al., 2026; Kleyn et al., 2021, 2021; Ramesh et al., 2023; Rappaport et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2024).

Remnant forest patches within an urban matrix would contain high diversity of avifauna as compared to the surrounding urban habitats. However, extent of utilization of these urban forests would vary greatly as we move from edges of these forest patches to the core areas. 

We hypothesize overdispersion of the available signal space due to greater degree of signal partitioning in the core of the urban forest patches as compared to the edge habitats. In addition, edge sites should also exhibit lower acoustic signal space utilization as compared to the core areas. Furthermore, abundance of early successional trees and shrubs should lower detection of forest specialists and instead, increase apparent encounters of habitat generalists in the edge habitats. In view of lower habitat heterogeneity, we also expect greater species diversity in terms of the birds vocalizing in the core forest sites as compared to the edge sites, which are closer to built-up areas.

As a result, remnant forest patches within an urban matrix- like in this case, the Jalukbari Hill landscape of Guwahati city, Kamrup Metropolitan, act as refuge sites for a large variety of fauna in human modified landscapes. 


